Background/Aims American Indian adults have some of the highest alcohol abstinence rates compared to the overall US population. Despite this, many American Indian people are more likely to concurrently use alcohol and illicit drugs and are less likely to participate and remain in outpatient treatment for alcohol and other drug use compared to the general US population. There is limited knowledge about effective interventions targeting alcohol and drug co-addiction among American Indian adults. Contingency management is a behavioral intervention designed to increase drug abstinence by offering monetary incentives in exchange for drug and alcohol negative urine samples. We aim to evaluate and describe a culturally tailored contingency management intervention to increase alcohol and other drug abstinence among American Indian adults residing in a Northern Plains reservation. Methods This 2 × 2 factorial, randomized controlled trial currently includes 114 American Indian adults with alcohol and/or drug dependence who are seeking treatment. Participants were randomized into one of four groups that received (1) contingency management for alcohol, (2) contingency management for other drug, (3) contingency management for both substances, or (4) no contingency management for either substance. We present descriptive, baseline data to characterize the sample and describe the modified contingency management approach that is specific to the community wherein this trial was being conducted. Results The sample is 49.1% male, with an average age of 35.8 years (standard deviation = 10.4 years). At baseline, 43.0% of the sample tested positive for ethyl glucuronide, 50.9% of participants self-reported methamphetamine as their most used drug, 36.8% self-reported cannabis, and 12.3% self-reported prescription opiates as their most used drug. Among randomized participants, 47.4% tested positive for cannabis, 28.1% tested positive for methamphetamine, 16.7% tested positive for amphetamines, and 2.1% tested positive for opiates. Conclusion This is the first study to examine a culturally tailored contingency management intervention targeting co-addiction of two substances among American Indian adults. By establishing a tribal-university partnership to adapt, implement, and evaluate contingency management, we will increase the literature on evidence-based addiction treatments and research, while improving trust for addiction interventions among American Indian communities through ongoing collaboration. Moreover, results have implications for the use of contingency management as an intervention for co-addiction in any population.
